# Assessing Prediction Models for Detecting Presence of Breast Cancer

Assessing the efficacy of routine blood measurements in predicting disease presence through predictive models can be implemented to improve the early screening processes for diagnosing breast cancer. Breast cancer, one of the most common cancers affecting women, has the potential to be detected early through routine mammograms. The data used in this project was generated by investigators at the University of Coimbra and University Hospital Centre of Coimbra. The routine clinical markers are Age, BMI, Glucose, Insulin, HOMA (Homeostatic Model Assessment), Leptin, Adiponectin, Resistin, and MCP-1. Crisostomo et al. (2016) identified a deregulation of these parameters in obesity-associated breast cancer. Patricio et al. (2018) implemented 3 machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Support Vector Machine, and Logistic Regression) to identify potential biomarkers to be used as additional breast cancer screening. This can benefit in early diagnosis of breast cancer by providing additional screening with diagnostic mammograms and ultrasounds. 

In this project, I used five machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Support Vector Machine, Logistic Regression, K-Nearest Neighbor, and Adaptive Boosting) to replicate a subsection of their results and evaluate the prediction of obesity-related breast cancer from routine blood measurements. My objectives were to execute exploratory data analysis of the attributes, perform feature selection, implement the 5 machine learning algorithms for the top 5 and all 9 features, assess model performances,
and evaluate a stacked machine learning model with the top 5 and all 9 features as well. Most implementation will be done with the CARET (Classification and Regression Training) R package.


Data Source and Paper Citation: 
Patricio, M., Pereira, J., Crisostomo, J., Matafome, P., Gomes, M., Seica,
R., & Caramelo, F. (2018). Using Resistin, glucose, age and BMI to predict the presence of breast cancer.
BMC Cancer, 18(1), 29. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-017-3877-1

Additional Relevant Paper Citation: 
Crisostomo, J., Matafome, P., Santos-Silva, D., Gomes, A. L., Gomes,
M., Patrıcio, M., Letra, L., Sarmento-Ribeiro, A. B., Santos, L., & Sei¸ca, R. (2016). Hyperresistinemia and metabolic dysregulation: A risky crosstalk in obese breast cancer. Endocrine, 53(2), 433–442.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-016-0893-x

Data was supplied by UCI Machine Learning Repository

# Repository Contents

PredictionModels_BreastCa_Comibra.Rmd: 

R Markdown file containing code for performing exploratory data analysis of the features, feature selection with recursive feature elimination, and implementing five machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Support Vector Machine, Logistic Regression, K-Nearest Neighbors, and Adaptive Boosting) using the top 5 features from feature selection and all 9 features. The file also contains code for assessing model performances with AUC/ROC curves, sensitivity, and specificity, and determining performance of a stacked machine learning model with the top 5 features and all 9 features as well. 
